v8.0.0-alpha.2 (#15656)
mui/mui-x: CHANGELOG.md

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## v8.0.0-alpha.2

_Nov 28, 2024_

We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 17 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- 👨🏽‍💻 Improve resize performance on the Data Gird.
- 🌍 Improve Spanish, Portuguese, Chinese locales on the Data Grid component.
- 🌍 Improve Dutch locales on the Date and Time Pickers components.
- 🐞 Bugfixes
- 📚 Documentation improvements

Special thanks go out to the community contributors who have helped make this release possible:
@dloeda, @headironc, @jedesroches, @k-rajat19, @lauri865, @mathzdev, @nphmuller, @zinoroman.
Following are all team members who have contributed to this release:
@arminmeh, @alexfauquette, @cherniavskii, @flaviendelangle, @JCQuintas, @KenanYusuf, @LukasTy, @MBilalShafi, @oliviertassinari.

<!--/ HIGHLIGHT_ABOVE_SEPARATOR /-->

### Data Grid

#### Breaking changes

> - The `GridOverlays` component is not exported anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `<GridOverlays />` component is not exported anymore.
```

> - The prop `indeterminateCheckboxAction` has been removed. Clicking on an indeterminate checkbox "selects" the unselected descendants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `indeterminateCheckboxAction` prop has been removed. Clicking on an indeterminate checkbox "selects" the unselected descendants.
```

> - The `apiRef.current.resize` method was removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `apiRef.current.resize()` method was removed.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The default value of the `rowSelectionPropagation` prop has been changed to `{ parents: true, descendants: true }` which means that the selection will be propagated to the parents and descendants by default.
  To revert to the previous behavior, pass `rowSelectionPropagation` as `{{ parents: false, descendants: false }}`.

```

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@v8.0.0-alpha.2`

> - [DataGrid] Change test dom check from /jsdom/ to /jsdom|HappyDOM/. (#15634) @jedesroches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Change test dom check from `/jsdom/` to `/jsdom|HappyDOM/`. (#15634) @jedesroches
```

- [DataGrid] Clear timers on unmount (#15620) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Fix order of spread props on toolbar items (#15556) @KenanYusuf
- [DataGrid] Improve resize performance (#15549) @lauri865
- [DataGrid] Make estimation label more accurate (#15632) @arminmeh

> - [DataGrid] Remove `GridOverlays` export (#15573) @k-rajat19

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Remove `<GridOverlays />` export (#15573) @k-rajat19
```

- [DataGrid] Remove `indeterminateCheckboxAction` prop (#15522) @MBilalShafi

> - [DataGrid] Remove try/catch from `GridCell` due to performance issues (#15616) @lauri865

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Remove try/catch from `<GridCell />` due to performance issues (#15616) @lauri865
```

- [DataGrid] Remove unused `resize` method (#15599) @cherniavskii

> - [DataGrid] Support column virtualization with dynamic row height (#15541) @cherniavskii

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Support column virtualization with dynamic row height (#15541) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Update the default value for `rowSelectionPropagation` (#15523) @MBilalShafi
```

- [l10n] Improve Chinese (zh-CN) locale (#15570) @headironc
- [l10n] Improve Portuguese (pt-PT) locale (#15561) @mathzdev

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v8.0.0-alpha.2` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid@v8.0.0-alpha.2`, plus:

- [DataGridPro] Fix header filtering with `boolean` column type (#15528) @k-rajat19
- [DataGridPro] Fix pagination state not updating if the data source response has no rows (#15622) @zinoroman
- [DataGridPro] Fix selection propagation issue on initialization (#15461) @MBilalShafi

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-premium@v8.0.0-alpha.2` [![premium](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg-link 'Premium plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v8.0.0-alpha.2`.

> ### Date and Time Pickers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Date and Time Pickers

#### Breaking changes

- - The props receives by the `layout` and the `toolbar` slots have been reworked — [Learn more](https://next.mui.com/x/migration/migration-pickers-v7/#do-not-pass-the-section-type-as-a-generic).

- The `TSection` generic of the `FieldRef` type has been replaced with the `TValue` generic — [Learn more](https://next.mui.com/x/migration/migration-pickers-v7/#slots-breaking-changes).

```

- [DataGridPro] Fix pagination state not updating if the data source response has no rows (#15622) @zinoroman
- [DataGridPro] Fix selection propagation issue on initialization (#15461) @MBilalShafi

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-premium@v8.0.0-alpha.2` [![premium](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg-link 'Premium plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v8.0.0-alpha.2`.

### Date and Time Pickers

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@v8.0.0-alpha.2`

- [l10n] Improve Dutch (nl-NL) locale (#15564) @nphmuller
- [pickers] Fix DST issue with `America/Asuncion` timezone and `AdapterMoment` (#15552) @flaviendelangle
- [pickers] Improve validation internals (#15419) @flaviendelangle
- [pickers] Remove `TSection` and strictly type `TValue` (#15434) @flaviendelangle
- [pickers] Remove `orientation`, `isLandscape`, `isRtl`, `wrapperVariant` and `disabled` props from `PickersLayout` (#15494) @flaviendelangle

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro@v8.0.0-alpha.2` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-date-pickers@v8.0.0-alpha.2`.

### Charts

#### Breaking changes

> - [Breaking] Charts don't have a `div` wrapping them anymore. All props are now passed to the root `svg` instead of the `div`.

Reviewer 3: @alexfauquette should we rewrite this to the following, considering our discussion tomorrow? 🤔 

```suggestion
- [Breaking] `ChartContainer` doesn't wrap the `svg` with a `div` anymore. All props are now passed to the root `svg` instead of the `div`.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Breaking] Charts don't have a `div` wrapping them anymore. All props are now passed to the root `svg` instead of the `div`.
- [Breaking] `<ChartContainer />` doesn't wrap the `svg` with a `div` anymore. All props are now passed to the root `svg` instead of the `div`.
```

or if this is a well known enough component could be:

```suggestion
- [Breaking] Charts don't have a `div` wrapping them anymore. All props are now passed to the root `svg` instead of the `div`.
- [Breaking] Chart Container doesn't wrap the `svg` with a `div` anymore. All props are now passed to the root `svg` instead of the `div`.
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Breaking] Charts Container don't have a `div` wrapping them anymore. All props are now passed to the root `svg` instead of the `div`.
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## v8.0.0-alpha.2

> _Nov 28, 2024_

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
_Nov 29, 2024_
```

- 🌍 Improve Dutch locales on the Date and Time Pickers components.
- 🐞 Bugfixes
- 📚 Documentation improvements

Special thanks go out to the community contributors who have helped make this release possible:
@dloeda, @headironc, @jedesroches, @k-rajat19, @lauri865, @mathzdev, @nphmuller, @zinoroman.
Following are all team members who have contributed to this release:
@arminmeh, @alexfauquette, @cherniavskii, @flaviendelangle, @JCQuintas, @KenanYusuf, @LukasTy, @MBilalShafi, @oliviertassinari.

<!--/ HIGHLIGHT_ABOVE_SEPARATOR /-->

### Data Grid

#### Breaking changes

- The `<GridOverlays />` component is not exported anymore.
- The `indeterminateCheckboxAction` prop has been removed. Clicking on an indeterminate checkbox "selects" the unselected descendants.
- The `apiRef.current.resize()` method was removed.
- The default value of the `rowSelectionPropagation` prop has been changed to `{ parents: true, descendants: true }` which means that the selection will be propagated to the parents and descendants by default.
  To revert to the previous behavior, pass `rowSelectionPropagation` as `{ parents: false, descendants: false }`.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- If `estimatedRowCount` is used, the text provided to the [Table Pagination](/material-ui/api/table-pagination/) component from the Material UI library is updated and requires additional translations. Check the example at the end of [Index-based pagination section](/x/react-data-grid/pagination/#index-based-pagination).

```

- Users can create their own HTML components using chart data — [Learn more](https://next.mui.com/x/react-charts/components/#html-components).

#### `@mui/x-charts@v8.0.0-alpha.2`

- [charts] Allow the creation of custom HTML components using charts data (#15511) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Flatten imports from `@mui/utils` and `@mui/system` (#15603) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Introduce the plugin system (#15513) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Prevent invalid `releasePointerCapture` (#15602) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Fix custom Tooltip demos (#15631) @alexfauquette

#### `@mui/x-charts-pro@v8.0.0-alpha.2` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-charts@v8.0.0-alpha.2`.

### Tree View

#### `@mui/x-tree-view@v8.0.0-alpha.2`

- [TreeView] Flatten import from `@mui/utils` and `@mui/system` (#15604) @alexfauquette

#### `@mui/x-tree-view-pro@v8.0.0-alpha.2`

Same changes as in `@mui/x-tree-view@v8.0.0-alpha.2`.

### Docs

- [docs] Fix 404 links (#15575) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Fix bash comments (#15571) @oliviertassinari

> - [docs] Remove selectors section from list view docs (#15637) @KenanYusuf

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

Think we can remove since it's just patching a mistake in the list view documentation which hasn't gone live yet.

> - [docs] Fix bash comments (#15571) @oliviertassinari

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- [docs] Fix bash comments (#15571) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Fix Pickers theme augmentation example (#15672) @LukasTy 
```

- [docs] Replace use of e.g. with for example (#15572) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Update stale `new` and `preview` tags in v8 docs (#15547) @JCQuintas
- [docs] Fix layout shift image on Tree View docs (#15626) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Fix anchorEl API page for charts (#15625) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Add documentation for the list view feature (#15344) @KenanYusuf

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [docs] Improve migration guide for the Data Grid (#15673) @arminmeh

```
